>> Great.
So without further ado,
let's get to the seven steps
for freeing yourself from
anxiety, depression, and ADHD.
So what's the first step?
>> First step is always to
remove the thing that's causing
you irritation.
So what I always like to do
is go through the person's
biochemistry, go
through their system,
and have a look at
what's happening to them
and what they're
being affected by.
So the first step
is always allergy.
OK, so allergy will always
cause a liver response.
When you have a food allergy
response, what that does
is affect the liver.
The liver uses enzymes that
are also required for the brain
chemicals.
And when the liver's using them
all up, the brain misses out.
So within 5 to 10 minutes
of eating something
you're allergic to, you can
start having mood changes.
A mood drop, anger,
irritability, depression,
sadness, fatigue,
mental fatigue,
the real brain-fog kind of
feeling, just really not
coping at all.
And you see the
little kids, they
go from perfectly
happy one minute
to then crying that
they missed out
on getting picked for
a group or, you know,
no one likes me,
that kind of thing.
And it can be an instant change.
And you wonder what happened.
So food allergy will do that.
The great news
about food allergy
is that it doesn't take
very long to find out
what you're allergic to.
And it's only about
a week turnaround
between getting your tests
done and getting the results.
And it only takes about
between one and three days
to actually remove those
foods out of your system.
So you can have a
really fast response
when you take away
that problem first.
>> And what are the common
foods that people are allergic
to that are suffering from
anxiety or depression or ADHD?
>> The most profound thing
that I've found when testing
patients for food allergies
is that no one has the same
allergens.
And this is the
message that I've
been trying to explain to
people is that you can't
assume what you're allergic to.
I find that very often the foods
that are the most overprocessed
are the ones that
people don't tolerate
very well, such as your
dairy, your gluten products,
even eggs because of whatever
is being fed to the chickens.
So it depends on where you're
buying your eggs from, as well.
You find some people will react
to some eggs and not other eggs
because of what's in them.
Yeah, so you can go right back
to the food that you're eating
and what they're being fed, too.
>> So it's like, you
are what you eat,
but you are what your
food eats, as well.
>> Exactly.
Yeah, absolutely.
So, yeah, you can have those
really common allergens.
But from the other
perspective, the way
you become allergic is by
suffering with leaky gut.
So I don't know if you've
heard about leaky gut.
It's quite a common term,
but a lot of people haven't.
And leaky gut is a
situation where your gut
wall has become permeable
where it's gappy
because it's inflamed.
So the food that you
regularly eat passes
through the gut wall
and your bloodstream
picks it up on the other side.
And once it does that,
it produces an antigen
against that food for good.
They say that you can
desensitize to some foods.
I have seen the odd food
that can be desensitized to,
but I don't see
it very commonly.
And I also find that once they
have desensitized to the food,
if you do bring it
back in high levels,
you can become allergic
or sensitive to it again.
So I tend to find
that whatever you
find is an allergen for you,
you should avoid it from there
on as much as you can.
But what we need
to know is that you
can actually become
allergic to anything
you are regularly eating.
So you can almost pick
the time in your life
when you became
allergic to start with.
So for me, my food
allergy list has
all of the foods that I
ate when I was a child.
So I look back, if I were
to go home for Christmas
and I eat all of the
food that my dad loves
to prepare for Christmas,
I know I'm feeling terrible
within the first day of
doing that because it's
all those foods that I used
to eat when I was a kid.
>> And what's the
theory behind that?
Is that because you've
consumed so much
of that food over a
period of your life
that it caused that
aggravation to the gut
in the first place,
which caused the leaky
gut or the permeability
of the gut wall?
>> I think that,
more to the point,
whatever it was that was causing
the inflammation of my gut back
all those years ago when
I suffered with migraines
and headaches, it could
have been a stress response
because I was a very shy child,
I could've been born with a few
allergens.
I know my mother had a
lot of allergy problems,
so had I been passed on
those problems through birth,
then I would have been
reacting to the foods
that she was giving me,
which would have caused
gut inflammation.
And then my allergy list
would have grown from there
because I would
have just continued
to leak those foods that
I was regularly eating.
>> So for somebody who may not
be able to visit your clinic,
what should they ask their
practitioner about what type
of test they should get to find
out what they're allergic to?
Because there's IgG
tests, there's DNA tests,
there's so many different
tests these days.
What is the gold standard
about really uncovering
what you're allergic to?
>> In my experience, there
are so many different tests.
I found I've had
the best response
from the pathology testing
that tests your white cells
against the foods.
So there are labs all over
the world who can do that.
So that's what you
really need to look for.
Though, all of the other
tests that are available
tend to have accuracy
in what they're testing.
So you can do an
IgE allergy test
to the environmental products.
I had all of that done
when I was a teenager.
And that's where you
have you scratch tests
and they do the
desensitizing injections.
They are accurate
to the environment.
You are allergic to those things
or sensitive to those things.
That's IgE.
And then you've got your
IgG, which generally
tends to affect the gut
the most because that's
the food responses.
However, when you check for
white cell responses, that's
inflammation, that's
total system inflammation.
So they still haven't
fully determined how many
allergy responses there are.
It's just so vast.
It just keeps growing.
The more research is
done, the more they find.
But when you get this
white cell response,
you see anything that could
have caused your reaction.
So they test the food against
the white cells in your blood.
It's alive blood,
and they watch to see
if it has any
reaction whatsoever,
any one of the reactions.
So that pretty much
covers everything.
>> And when a list comes
back from this test,
how expansive is it?
>> It's pretty comprehensive.
>> So most people will have
three or five main allergies?
Or they'll have 20?
>> Well, it depends
on the experience.
For me, out of 200
foods, I have 70.
But a lot of those
foods I can easily
avoid because they're not
in my regular diet anymore.
So there's another 130
foods there available for me
to have that I can make a
whole varied diet out of.
And that's what you need to
look for when you're testing.
I never suggest people only
get a small amount of foods
tested because we need
to know what you're not
allergic to to make
a full diet out of.
So the larger range
you can test for, you
should because you
only ever really need
to do these tests once.
I had my tests redone five
years later by a different lab
and it came back
almost identical.
So five years different.
So to have that accuracy and to
know that only one or two foods
had changed, and I felt
that change as well.
So those new foods that I was
reacting to, I could tell.
I didn't feel well
on those foods.
So you can.
Once you get the test
done, you can basically
know that that's a very valuable
tool for the rest of your life,
that that's a road
map to your body.
And that's the most
important thing
that you can tell
people about allergy
is that no one can guess
what you're allergic to.
It could be up to 50 foods.
And there's no
way that I'm going
to be able to tell you what
you were eating when you were
a kid that you now can't have.
It could be pine nuts,
it could be basil,
it could be mushrooms.
It could be anything, and
we don't know the reaction
that that's going to
have with you either.
We don't know whether
it'll drop serotonin
or whether it'll just
cause inflammation,
whether it'll cause
insomnia and digestive pain.
All reactions can
be very different.
>> OK, interesting.
And do you believe that there's
a possibility that people
can heal from certain allergies
over time by repairing the gut?
Or is that a theory that hasn't
really been tested as much yet?
>> It's something that I've not
been able to successfully see
in myself and in my patients.
I have seen some things
removed, such as my before
and after allergy test.
There's the odd food that's not
showing up on my second test.
However, when I have too much
of it, I start to react again.
So this is why I think once
your body's produced the cell
memory against
that food, I think
that it's something that may
be a sensitivity or a risk
of being a sensitivity for life.
So it doesn't mean
you necessarily
have to completely
cut it out forever,
but you should just
have it sparingly.
>> And for me, when you
were talking earlier about
allergens, this is the step
one of the seven steps.
You said that after
you eat it, you
can feel depressed or
anxious or short on temper.
And I personally know that
when I eat gluten I feel like.
And so do you believe
that a lot of people
that might be
listening to this may
be able to
automatically go, hang
on, I know when I eat this
particular type of food--
it might be bread or it might
be eggs or it might be dairy--
that they do feel a
certain way half an hour,
an hour, or two hours
later, or almost
immediately after eating it?
But that's definitely a
sign that they probably
are reacting to that?
>> Absolutely.
And if you're not able
to get a blood allergy
test to work out what
it is, you should keep
what we call a symptom diary.
So just grab an exercise book,
you put a line down the middle,
you write down
what you're eating.
And on the other
side of the page,
you write down when
you get the symptoms.
So you write the time of the
food, the time of the symptom.
And after a couple of weeks--
I know it can be a little bit
painstaking to start with,
but this could be a lifelong
journey for you otherwise.
After a couple of
weeks, you can see
a pattern between your
behavior and certain foods.
If you've got many,
many allergens that
can be very difficult
to do-- and I know
I wasn't able to do it
for myself because I
had too many allergens.
So when I was younger,
I would remove dairy
and put soy in there instead,
not realizing that soy
was an allergen for me too.
Plus, I was eating eggs
and I was eating capsicum
and I was eating all of these
great things, such as carrots.
And I'm allergic to a fair
few vegetables, as well.
So it could really be anything.
You can't assume.
So you know you can try and
do the elimination type thing,
but I find that
people really struggle
and they never really
quite get it right.